As written, the question asks:

Does anyone agree with the argument that 'To Kill a Mockingbird' is racist? Many people believe that this is true as it depicts a story in which a white man heroically saves a helpless black man, thus encouraging racial stereotypes of weakness.

This displays some ignorance of the events of the book, because the white man in question, Atticus Finch, does not keep his black client, Tom Robinson, from being convicted, sentenced, and lynched for a rape Robinson did not commit. This isn’t a case of a white man saving a black man, because saved men aren’t violently murdered.

But let’s engage with the rest of the question. Is To Kill a Mockingbird racist?

Conversations like these are usually extremely controversial. As an example, let’s look at a book published 75 years before Mockingbird, Mark Twain’s Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. The intended message of the book — the cheeky foreword notwithstanding — is anti-racist. The book has no patience for characters who do not treat the character of Jim with the respect due anyone else, and one of the most powerful moments of the text comes when the title character decides he’d rather condemn himself to Hell than Jim to slavery.

However, the book isn’t great on race from a modern standpoint. Jim is an ugly racial stereotype in many regards, as are the rest of the (mostly unnamed and almost entirely unimportant) black characters. The bottom line is that, while the book was certainly not intended to be racist and was strongly anti-racist for its time, if you tried to write a book like it today, you’d rightly be called to task for doing so. This is also true of an even more stridently anti-racist book from 1852, Uncle Tom’s Cabin.

What I’m saying here is that people are creatures of their time, and what may be enlightened in one time may be deeply problematic a few decades later. When To Kill a Mockingbird was published, Brown v. Board of Education had been decided only six years earlier, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 had yet to be drafted.

Flagrant, unapologetic institutional racism was very much the norm. Violent defense of that racism was also very much the norm, like with the 1955 lynching of Emmett Till, the 1963 16th Street Baptist Church bombing, the 1963 murder of Medgar Evers, and the 1964 Mississippi Burning murders, to name a few of the many, many, many, many such incidents. Now, for all that race relations in the US are far from perfect or equitable today, they were unquestionably much, much worse half a century ago, so we’d expect the progressives of those days to look a little bit backward by today’s standards. If they didn’t, that wouldn’t reflect well on us.

This is a long way of saying that To Kill a Mockingbird is an uncomfortable read in ways it was not intended to be. It is not irredeemably racist trash, it is not remotely close to being irredeemably racist trash, but there are aspects of it that are, at best, kinda icky half a century down the line.

To Kill a Mockingbird is a coming of age story, specifically, the coming of age story of a young white girl in Depression Era Mississippi. Indeed, there’s a lot from the book that people tend not to remember. Atticus’ portrayal in the sequel, Go Set a Watchman upset many people because of his racism in that book, which they felt didn’t follow from To Kill a Mockingbird. Thing is, it does follow: either Atticus has a gigantic blind spot where his sister is concerned — unlikely — or he decides the best thing he can do in raising his children is to bring a more racist (and classist) presence into their lives. It’s not a good look for the guy.

I need to point this out, because what does dominate people’s memory of To Kill a Mockingbird ultimately takes up about seven chapters of a 31 chapter book. The foiled lynching of Tom Robinson occurs in Chapter 15, and Robinson is convicted in Chapter 21. In other words, while the trial is important to the book and vitally so, it isn’t the point. The point of this story is that it’s a coming of age story, specifically Scout’s coming of age story.

Which means that To Kill a Mockingbird uses the story of a black man railroaded to ask how it affects the daughter of his attorney. To Kill a Mockingbird is against racism, but it’s almost entirely interested in the subject in looking at how racism affects white people, and not particularly interested in looking at how racism affects black people. The truth of the matter is that we get more psychological insight into Bob Ewell than we do into Tom Robinson, and there’s something more than a little gross about using Tom Robinson’s suffering and death as a vehicle in the story for white people to learn something while giving Robinson himself virtually no humanity.[1]

It’s also worth pointing out To Kill a Mockingbird’s role in cultural context. This is a book that is generally pointed to as the antiracist text you need to read. As an example, in 2006, British librarians ranked it as the one book every adult should read before they die, and this is generally the tenor of approval for the book. Which is weird. This is a book essentially about what oppression does to the oppressors,[2] so its dominance in the conversation about racism is at least weird. Naturally, the response to the book isn’t the fault of Lee or even the book itself, but society’s valuing Scout Finch’s coming of age over Sam Robinson’s is something of an indictment in and of itself.
[1] That’s not to say Harper Lee demonizes Robinson or anything along those lines — but making someone an uncomplicated saint as she essentially does for Robinson, and which she does not do for virtually any other character in the book, strips them of any possible depth. Robinson is a symbol, not a person.
[2] Both the active agents, like Bob Ewell, and those who are more passively complicit, like, yes, Atticus Finch.