Africa has known since the 16th century that Europeans (and to some extent foreigners) care little or do not care about them. They are just and unrestrained interests. In the 16th century, Europeans in the Great Navigations and in search of the long-awaited maritime route to the Indies. They made the African foot(a kind of coastal navigation, to refuel, trade and avoid the dangerous open sea). They did not enter the African interior because at the time, the tribes were organized and well armed.

In these negotiations the Europeans traded with these tribes. These tribes entered wars with rival tribes by the most varied reasons, mainly by territory. They made prisoners of war, that became slaves. And these slaves were sold to Europeans. Meanwhile, these tribes expanded these domains. Subsequently, cases such as Ethiopia occurred, such as when Italy sold arms to them and they occupied the country, but lost the war and were expelled.

The centuries passed until we reached the 17th century. Where England and France set out to fulfill the terrible scientific racism and the supposed "white man's burden" where they set out to give culture to the acculturated.The plain truth was that Africa is very rich in raw materials, it is a large consumer market and still provides cheap labor. At that time, they attested that the African was inferior in intelligence and culture.Common biopiracy and still exploitation of all kinds as well. They entered the continent.The Treaty of Berlin of 1885 ratified that. The Europeans imposed to the continent a sharing of borders and the Africans accepted, although they were exploited and at that moment, dominated by the Europeans.Another evidence of this is the fact that the great majority of African capitals are located on the coast. They were the best cities, largest populations and best infrastructure because the Europeans arrived in the port, extracted the raw materials arriving in the zones of train production, returned to port and went away.

Cases like Belgium's in Congo have become commonplace. In order to facilitate domination, if they did not kill everyone, they armed the minority tribe and then the majority,such as Tutsis and Hutus.The world (read USA and Europe) has always created a culture of repulsion to America, Asia and Africa: it is enough to see the prejudice and the astonishment to see that Russia lost a war for Japan in 1905.

Africa only became important to Europeans in World War II: Europe at war, Europeans fled ship to these countries. The richest went to Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal or the USA.And even by the contingent of Africans on the European front lines. It was common to see South Africans, Egyptians in the British and Algerian armies, Moroccans in the French Army. And they helped in many battles for their battle-hardened spirit. After that, when they were heavily repressed in the post-Second War independence movements.Most countries only achieved independence in the 1960s

After this, Africa was seen itself to bleed and no one to stop their bleeding. After the violent independence civil wars took place. From 1975 to 2002, for example, we had a bloody War in Angola, which the UN intervened only because it was questioned. The UN and NATO, the first one, which proposed to prevent any conflict in 1945, turned its back. only resolves conflicts of your interest. He intervened in Iraq, but only intervened in Bosnia after popular pressure. Interesting because Iraq is in Asia, far from the "North Atlantic" but Bosnia is in Europe and was ignored, being only stage of bombing in the last year of the war.

My country, Brazil made different. The Brazilian Government, in 1974, was one of the first to accept the independence of Angola. Even Brazil being a right-wing government recognizes the independence of a country under Marxist orientation in the middle of the Cold War. To gain geopolitical strength, and consolidate Angola and Mozambique as an ally. Both are two countries that are part of the eight that make up the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries. Brazil, in fact, is more African than European. In the 21st century, Brazil invested in the port of Angola and Mozambique to strengthen the friendship with the two countries, and no, it was not for ores, we already have many in our territory.

There are numerous conflicts in progress and the UN does nothing. The European countries also do nothing. The United States in 1993 said that they intervened in Somalia by goodwill. None of this. They intervened because at that time, piracy was intense and so the cargo ships were being hijacked an alarming numbers. Cargo was sold and this was giving damage to the European and American economies. In 1994, we had a brutal genocide in Rwanda, and the UN did nothing, not even the great powers.

There are numerous American and French bases in African territory. It is not international aid, much less Christian charity. It is for the extraction of minerals and raw materials. The fact of having 10% of the world's reserves of oil and mineral wealth, makes Africa strategic for the world powers. AFRICOM (US Command for Africa) was created,in 2008, its function is to militarily protect the sources of raw materials that the US finds strategic, as well as encompasses the US policy to combat terrorism of Islamic bias.It is also a response to the growing Chinese presence in Africa.

The United States set up a base in Djibouti in 2002 to monitor the movement of ships at the entrance to the Red Sea and the East African coast and to combat armed groups in the Horn of Africa. France does the same in Libya but with the Mediterranean Sea. It also maintains permanent bases in Gabon, Chad, Central African Republic and Côte d'Ivoire.China arrives seeking to guarantee access to natural resources, especially petroleum. It invests in infrastructure to get closer, and also military cooperation to show that they are friends but are not. Clearly agreements are very disadvantageous for Africans.

So no, Africans know very well that a lot of people do not care about them. They have seen this for almost the whole story. They are strictly personal interests.