I’m not sure this qualifies as a mannerism, but I’ve observed people who were raised in solidly middle-class homes, but have moved up or down the ladder early in their lives and have been quite successful - or otherwise - since then. One difference between those who moved up and those who moved down in economic terms, seems to be the capacity to identify and set reasonable goals and to accomplish them quickly and efficiently. I have spent time in the homes of families who have both lower-middle-class and upper-middle class people among the extended clan. For example, for a 6 AM flight, where it’s necessary to leave the house at 4:30 AM, the upper-middle class family members are up, [shaved], hair done, dressed, [make-up on], packed, and children dressed and packed, and all on their way out the door . . . and the rooms in which they stayed have been left immaculate, with the beds stripped and the linens ready to go into the laundry . . . while at least one of the lower-middle-class relatives are still struggling to find their phone and another to unjam the stuck zippers on their carry-ons. And the rooms in which the lower-middle-class relatives had stayed look a complete mess - like the proverbial war zone. . . and the children are still looking for toys they’ve left behind.

In some of these families, the lower-middle-class members may be looking in the cupboards for something to prepare for dinner at 4:30 PM, and by 4:45, have decided to head to the nearby grocery store for some provisions. By the time they return home with their bundles, their children are very hungry and fussing, so it’s necessary to give them snacks — often sugary snacks. And the meal is prepared in a rush, leaving a very messy kitchen to clean up afterwards. And it turns out, the person prepping the meal forgot lettuce at the store, so there is no salad or other green vegetable.

In contrast, the typical upper-middle-class members of these families will, for example, have decided the night before what they want dinner to be for the following evening - now, this evening. (One SAHM I know doesn’t hire help; she doesn’t want to pay someone to do work she can get done herself, and work she thinks nothing of doing.) She has has organized other family members to mind the younger children while she does her chores, and has peeled and cut up carrots and potatoes that were already in the pantry the night before. She is at the grocery store by 10:15 AM; home and dredging the chunks of beef in seasoned flour in preparation for tonight’s dinner by 11 AM. The beef bourguignon is simmering in the oversized electric crock-pot by noon. The dinner table is set with starched and pressed linen by 2 PM, in plenty of time for a fun outing. In the meantime, the kitchen has been cleaned, all implements put away, the beds made up, laundry put into the machine and started, and the vacuuming done. There’s plenty of time to get the big things done, as well as to get the little add-ons, the extra touches, the niceties done, as well.

Among the upper-middle class family members there might be an instance of plans gone awry. A family outing that involves a long drive to an amusement park turns out to be a disappointment - the family arrives only to find the park closed for upkeep, but there was no notice on the website. The children are dismayed; the parents are annoyed. And so Mama or Dad immediately gets on the phone to find something else to do in the area. They quickly find a nearby train museum and a historic monument and announce these as possibilities. When the children protest, the parents gently but firmly insist that the amusement park is not going to happen today, but they promise another visit at a later time and for today, they may choose between the other two options.

When the lower-middle-class family finds itself in the same situation, there is at first time much wailing and grinding of teeth by both children and adults. Then there is arguing between the parents about who is at fault for not realizing that the park is closed, and followed by mutual reproaches for unreasonableness and unkindness in the present situation. Past instances of these are dredged up and hashed over while the children continue to cry. At last the stressed-out parents announce they’ve decide to turn the car around and go home and invite the little ones to play on the backyard swing set at home, which announcement is received with further protests from the children.

I think it gets down to a question of energy and focus and priorities. Those of these family members who have made their way into upper-middle classes seem to have made achievement of goals both great and small the priority of their lives, and they are able to devote all their time, energy, and attention, to the achievement of these to completion, when necessary, without becoming distracted. If there are legitimate distractions or ruining of plans, these upper-middles are not utterly nonplussed; they know how to recover quickly, find ways to modify the original game plan, and make its accomplishment their new goal. Children are brought along in this way of doing things.

The middle class members who have descended to the lower-middle class seem to struggle with prioritizing their time, attention, and energy. They tend to leave things undone, and to be behind schedule because they dawdled, or forgot, or weren’t paying attention, or got distracted. They seem to put priorities on arrangements and personal preferences that have little to do with the actual achievement of the goal they’re trying to reach. And so when the moment of truth is upon them, they’re not ready, and they hold themselves up, and hold everyone else up. And when things don’t work out, there’s a scene in which they seem to fall to pieces for at least a little while, rather than immediately seeking and settling on a new plan.

It seems to me also that those who have dropped from the middle to the lower-middle class have an attitude of self-pity (“why me?” “why must things be so difficult or unpleasant for me?”) whereas the upper-middles, when faced with the same situation, just get on with things. Nothing much seems to throw them. And whereas these lower-middles find the very prospect of facing chores and burdens of everyday life almost as insurmountable as Mount Everest, so daunting that they’re exhausted mentally almost before they begin, the upper-middles admit that there’s a lot to do, but they view the work as something to get through, and they intentionally look forward to plenty time to relax and enjoy themselves as a reward, afterwards.

(I present this mini-essay as merely anecdotal evidence and personal observations of the differences I’ve observed, and I realize very well that what I’ve observed may not generalize accurately to middle - upper or lower - class people, at all.)

