Because the numbers and facts that matter support that confidence. In basically all indicators, from foreign direct investment to global popularity, the international confidence on China has been increasing steadily, despite having a big problem of global image for a long time (much older than the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, because it comes at least since Mao’s Cultural Revolution, or even since the annexation of Tibet in 1950). Now, instead, the problem of an increasing negative image is on the U.S. side of the equation. With the America First policy, and all the associated events, the soft power of the U.S. has been falling abruptly (after all, who would follow a leader that tells everyone else that his personal gains will matter the most in all his decisions, and acts accordingly), while China’s soft power keeps improving, and its government even imitates old U.S. strategies, after updating them, to make that image even more positive. Why does that matter? Because there is no political currency as important as “soft power” in a time of global supply chains and global markets. Arguably, the U.S. was the country that discovered that reality first (this is, how important is to become a global beacon associated to certain values in the common imagination to attract prosperity), as you can confirm after reading the famous poem at the Statue of Liberty museum. But now it has forgotten its own lesson, while other countries keep learning.
At the same time, you hear a lot about how the U.S. is still the biggest market on earth in nominal GDP, with the 50 thousand dollars on average household income per year. But the trick is inside that word, “average”, because how solid and big can really be the market of a nation where just 3 persons hold more wealth than the 160 million citizens located at the bottom 50%? If you consider also that the U.S. has only a quarter of China’s population, and the U.S. government is making each time more difficult to immigrate to the U.S. (also undocumented, but particularly legally), the size of the U.S. market is not only narrower than it seems, but it is tightening. No matter what the GDP says, each person can only drive one car and use one cell-phone at the same time, so even if those 3 persons buy new and expensive goods each day, those 3 persons cannot replace 160 million customers. The tax-cuts “achieved” by the current administration will make the US. even less promising as a market, because they will be paid in lost-benefits by the people who already have less money to spend, and less paths toward economic well-being. Like the Tax Policy Center claims: “low- and middle-income households will end up worse off than they would without the tax cuts in the first place” (Who Will Pay for the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act?). So, an extreme inequality that is constantly increasing, harsher immigration laws accompanied by anti-immigrant rhetoric, and a fertility rate that has been falling to record lows (mainly because having kids in the U.S. is simply too expensive), mean in the practice the U.S. will have less domestic customers, not more, in a few years, for everything unrelated to food and essential goods.
In fact, right now almost everything about the U.S. economy is starting to look like smoke and mirrors, and I believe the current policies will generate a huge bill to pay, which shouldn’t be surprising if you consider that the current U.S. president was already able to bankrupt a casino twice. For example, the second trimester of 2018 will set a record growth for the U.S. The current administration will sell that as an achievement, like a supposed result of the tax cuts. But that narrative is false. The tax cuts didn’t have the expected effect —or at least the effect that was promised to the U.S. electorate. The U.S. stock market is not surviving by investors willing to take risks, or even less because investors believe the U.S. will “win” the war with China, but mainly by corporate buybacks. The corporations took the tax cuts, and instead of creating new permanent jobs or rising the wages, they rewarded their shareholders —big surprise there, eh? So, why then the “record growth”? Because people knew that a trade war with China (and the EU, and Mexico, and Canada) was coming in July. So, many companies bought many goods when it was still possible to buy them cheap. Then, to say it plainly, it is all a mirage (or like Paul Krugman says, “quarterly fluctuations in growth are mainly noise, telling you very little about long-term economic prospects”), and in some months the awakening will come. But probably not before the November elections, because the new round of tariffs (the 200 billion that may have a real effect on the economy) will not kick in before September. And in macroeconomics, real changes take time (not in vain, the current U.S. administration was able to present the results of decisions taken by the previous administration as its own successes for over one year).
China instead looks fragile if you look at the stock market, or how the renminbi and the euro have lost ground to the U.S. dollar. But once again it is just smoke and mirrors. The stock market does not have the same importance in China than in the U.S., and a cheaper yuan actually helps China’s exports. Not in vain they have been accused by the U.S. of manipulating their currency to make their exports more competitive. But right now, there is no need to manipulate anything, because the trade war is making the U.S. dollar stronger, simply because that is the other side of being a “safe haven currency” at a time of crisis. Last month, “the trade surplus (of China) with the U.S. stood at $28.97 billion, the highest in any month in data back to 1999. Exports climbed to $42.62 billion, also a high, the customs administration said on Friday” (China's Trade Surplus With the U.S. Just Keeps on Growing). If the yuan falls enough, it is even possible that the trade deficit with China will keep growing despite the trade war.
Besides, I believe the tariffs strategy selected by the current U.S. administration is one of the most egregious examples of the Rise of Radical Incompetence in the so-called Western countries of lately. Who is going to be more affected by those tariffs? Directly, U.S. companies assembling in China; indirectly, U.S. customers when buying any Chinese made good. It will not be Chinese companies who pay most of the tariffs. At the same time, U.S. farmers have already lost a market that took them years to conquer, because China already dropped the tariffs of neighboring nations that can replace U.S. exports. This means, China is already prepared to replace many U.S. products. On the other side, have you heard anything about the U.S. government dropping tariffs for anyone? Therefore, even if the U.S. is able to replace China’s supply chains fast (which is debatable to say the least), how is going to replace Chinese products without increasing inflation in a time of stagnant wages without real paths to pressure for a salary increase?
However, China and the trade war is only part of the problems accumulating for the U.S. regarding global competitiveness. Today (07/17/2018), Japan and the European Union are signing their biggest free trade deal ever, largely thanks to the current U.S. administration trade policies. Therefore, both economies will have advantages competing against other nations in a combined market that is larger than the U.S. market, and with more than twice the U.S. population. Meanwhile, China is promoting the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), originally conceived as a response to the TPP that was pursued by the Obama administration and rejected by the current U.S. administration. Last month, 16 Countries from Asia and the Pacific met in Tokyo, and they expect to finish the deal by year’s end. If a deal is reached, it will cover a market that has almost half of the world’s population and almost twice the size of the U.S. market. As the page about the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership in Wikipedia states: “RCEP is the world's largest economic bloc, covering nearly half of the global economy. According to estimates by PwC, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP, PPP) of RCEP member states is likely to amount to nearly $250 trillion by 2050, or a quarter of a quadrillion dollars, with the combined GDPs of China and India making up more than 75% the amount. RCEP's share of the global economy could account for half of the estimated $0.5 quadrillion global GDP (PPP) by 2050”… Let me repeat: A quarter of a quadrillion dollars. This is 250 trillion dollars, roughly half of the expected world’s GDP by 2050.
So, the doors are closing for the U.S. in Europe, Asia and Oceania. Even if it can export there, it will be in less competitive conditions. Where is going the U.S. to sell its products then? Russia? Probably, but that country is far from being an economic powerhouse at the moment. Africa? Sorry, it is going to be very difficult to displace China from a market that the U.S. undervalued for decades. Latin America (currently the biggest market for U.S. products)? Good luck with that after all the talking about a wall cutting the Americas in two, and after treating thousands of Latin American children as subhuman beings, especially when other players are courting the region, arguably the most promising market in the 21st-century outside of Asia. And if the NAFTA deal is broken, even the easy-bought Mexican elites will have a tough path selling the need of keeping the U.S. as main trade partner to the Mexican population.
But we don’t have to wait until 2050 to know that the current U.S. administration is creating a huge problem for the U.S. economy. Right now, most of the Chinese products exported to the U.S. are bought by the “average” U.S. citizen. This is, they are bought because they are cheaper than made-in-the-U.S. alternatives. But the market in China for many U.S. products (many of them assembled there by U.S. companies) is different. China is a country with 1.4 billion citizens. So, even if most Chinese citizens cannot afford yet U.S. products, the middle classes have increased, and once you take into account both middle and rich classes, we are talking about a Chinese market with hundreds of millions of people for U.S. products. That is why GM and Apple have been selling more products in China than in the U.S. But so far, many final goods exported to China (or made in China by U.S. companies) are linked to the reputation of U.S. products. So, the results will be different in each country. If there is absolutely no Chinese exports to the U.S., are U.S. companies going to sell more in their homeland? How? Chinese imports are bought because they are cheaper than the home-made alternatives, so the average U.S. citizen will simply buy less, because he or she will not be able to afford as many products as bought before. But if there are no U.S. exports to China, the situation will not be the same there, because U.S. final goods are already more expensive, and they are bought by the more affluent because those goods have an attached reputation. So, if the U.S. products are not sold anymore in China, the customer will simply buy cheaper Chinese products, or more expensive foreign substitutes that don’t come from the U.S. Not in vain, the EU is already positioning itself to take advantage of this opportunity, which makes a lot of sense, especially after last week’s events in London, Brussels and Helsinki.
And I have not even talked yet about the increasing possibility that the U.S. dollar loses its place as main global currency to trade, because the role of the U.S. currency globally is linked to the system of alliances the U.S. built for seventy years. A system that looks each day more fragile, particularly after the current U.S. president called the EU a trade “foe”. So, if the EU is a foe, why should it continue to help the U.S. in maintaining the hegemonic place of the dollar instead of changing to a basket of currencies that would make the EU less vulnerable to any mismanagement by the U.S. government? After all, the 2008 recession showed well how irresponsible U.S. domestic policies can affect anyone on earth. However, if U.S. allies lose faith on the dollar, the U.S. economy will need to play under the same rules than everybody else. Regarding this, the paradox is that now the trade deficit doesn’t matter at all regarding U.S. macroeconomics, because the U.S. can buy with printed-at-home paper any foreign good that it desires or needs, without having to sell something produced in the U.S. in the international market first. But the current U.S. administration policies can make the trade deficit a very real problem for the U.S. If the dollar loses its role due to a liquidity crisis (a possibility still remote but real in different scenarios of the trade war, and by different paths), that role will be sorely missed by a country that so far has not been playing with the same monetary rules that apply to most of the world. In this sense, it is worth remembering that the U.S. economy has been playing under those special rules for over seventy years, so it is far from being ready to compete for resources and markets without the huge advantage provided by the special role of its currency, or to assume its own huge national debt by itself without being helped by foreign investors buying U.S. “securities”.
Finally, we are talking about two types of leadership. One is more than willing to take its country into dangerous waters (actually, it seems that it wants to open a new front of conflict each week, particularly with its traditional allies). The other is very risk averse (which is why you will heard of Chinese attempts of negotiation until the last minute, because they know that China is going to suffer also in any trade conflict). And two different economies: one is the “biggest market on earth” according to nominal GDP, but arguably is near the limit of its possibilities regarding growth (at least without tackling first the rocketing inequality and doing an education reform, both among the lesser of priorities for most U.S. politicians). The other is the “biggest market on earth” regarding population, the country with the biggest GDP (PPP), and more possibilities of growth for the future, because can you imagine a Chinese middle-class with over 1 billion people? It is a real possibility, and now it doesn’t seem far-fetched.
As an investor, if you are ultimately forced to choose between both, which market would do you prefer? The answer is not easy, but given how the current U.S. administration has been playing its hand, the future seems to be clearly leaning on direction to the East.